Pyodide 0.28 blog post (#53)
pyodide/pyodide-blog: content/posts/0.28-release.md

---
title: "Pyodide 0.28 Release"

> date: 2025-06-30

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-07-03 # TODO: adjust date before merging
```

draft: true
tags: ["announcement"]
author: ["Gyeongjae Choi", "Hood Chatham", "Agriya Khetarpal"] # multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# canonicalURL: "https://canonical.url/to/page"
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowBreadCrumbs: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
cover:
    # image: "<image path/url>" # image path/url
    # alt: "<alt text>" # alt text
    # caption: "<text>" # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: true # only hide on current single page
---

We are pleased to announce the Pyodide v0.28.0 release.

This release focused on standardizing the Pyodide platform.

## Defining the Pyodide ABI

In October 2024, the CPython steering council [approved restoring Emscripten as
a tier 3 target for
CPython](https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/256), starting from

> Python 3.14. We wrote
> [PEP 776 – Emscripten Runtime support](https://peps.python.org/pep-0776/)
> and
> [PEP 783 – Emscripten Packaging](https://peps.python.org/pep-0783/)
> in order to standardize the Emscripten target for Python.

Author: ```suggestion
Python 3.14. We wrote
[PEP 776 – Emscripten Runtime support](https://peps.python.org/pep-0776/)
and
[PEP 783 – Emscripten Packaging](https://peps.python.org/pep-0783/)
in order to standardize the Emscripten target for CPython.
```

PEP 783 aims to standardize the binary interfaces that Pyodide packages should
follow, helping ensure compatibility with current and future versions of
Pyodide. Our plan is to have one ABI per Python version. This means that
packages built for a particular version of Pyodide will be compatible with all
Pyodide versions that have the same version of Python.

> As part of this effort, we gave a definition of the Pyodide ABI
> [here](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/abi.html). This should help
> people using their own build tooling to ensure that they are compatible. Of
> course, most people will continue to use `pyodide-build`.

Author: ```suggestion
As part of this effort, we worked on defining [the Pyodide ABI](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/abi.html). This should help
people using their own build tooling to ensure that their packages are
compatible with our ABI. Of course, most people will continue to
use `pyodide-build`.
```

> This is a crucial step towards enabling the Pyodide ecosystem to develop with
> greater independence from Pyodide runtime releases. If PEP 783 is approved, we
> will also be allowed to upload Pyodide packages to PyPI.

Author: ```suggestion
This is a crucial step towards enabling the Pyodide ecosystem to develop with
greater independence from Pyodide runtime releases. If PEP 783 is approved,
we will also be allowed to upload Pyodide packages, i.e., with the
`pyodide_${YEAR}_${PATCH}_wasm32` platform tag, to PyPI.
```

### Building Binary Packages Compatible with the Pyodide ABI

> Building a package with `pyodide-build` or `cibuildwheel` will automatically
> produce ABI-compliant packages (or fail to build). If you use custom build
> toolchains, such as `maturin` for Rust projects, please consult the [Pyodide ABI
> documentation](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/blob/main/docs/development/abi.md)
> to ensure your packages meet the necessary compatibility standards.

Author: ```suggestion
Building a package with `pyodide-build` or `cibuildwheel` will automatically
produce ABI-compliant packages (or fail to build). If you use custom build
toolchains, such as `maturin` for Rust projects, please consult the [Pyodide ABI
documentation](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/abi.html#pyodide-2025-0-under-development)
to ensure your packages meet the necessary compatibility standards.
```

I think the docs link will look nicer here.

## Decoupling packages from the Pyodide runtime

Pyodide is a Python distribution, which means it includes a set of pre-built
packages that are deployed together with the Pyodide runtime. In Pyodide's early
stages, this approach was practical due to the challenges of getting packages to
run in the browser, ensuring that all components were built and tested together.

However, as both the Pyodide and WebAssembly ecosystems have matured, this
integrated approach has become less sustainable:

> From a user perspective, accessing packages not included in the Pyodide

Author: ```suggestion
From the users' perspective, accessing packages not included in the Pyodide
```

distribution often meant waiting for the next Pyodide release, a process that
could take several months.

> From a maintainer perspective, every commit to the Pyodide runtime repository

Author: ```suggestion
From the maintainers' perspective, every commit to the Pyodide runtime repository
```

> triggered a rebuild and retest of over 250 packages. Even a minor code change
> could result in a Continuous Integration (CI) run exceeding four hours.

Author: ```suggestion
triggered a rebuild and retest of over 250 packages. Even a minor code change
could result in a CI run exceeding four hours.
```

I assume we don't need to explain CI here?

will enable us to release sets of packages separately and more frequently,
independent of the Pyodide runtime's release schedule.

In the future, we are hoping that PEP 783 will be approved so people can upload
their Pyodide wheels to PyPI and use them from there.

## Python 3.13 support and disabled packages

Pyodide 0.28.0 is built with Python 3.13 and a new ABI based on Emscripten
4.0.9.

Some packages that were previously included in Pyodide 0.27.X are disabled in
Pyodide 0.28.0. Most of these are disabled because the wheel we used for Pyodide
0.27 was built externally to our tools by the package maintainers and we are
waiting on them to build a new version.

The following packages are disabled because we are waiting on their maintainers
to build a version for the updated ABI:

- arro3-compute
- arro3-core
- arro3-io
- duckdb
- osqp
- polars
- pyarrow

The following packages are disabled for other reasons:

- cartopy
- gensim
- geopandas
- pygame-ce
- pyproj
- zarr

These packages will be re-enabled when we can resolve the issues with them. We
welcome contributions from the community to help us with this.

> ## New matplotlib backend for Pyodide
> 
> For years, Pyodide relied on a custom Matplotlib backend (`wasm_backend`) to
> render plots directly in your browser. This backend was developed by the creator
> of Pyodide, Michael Droettboom, who was also a core developer of matplotlib.
> 
> However, it hadn't been maintained for a long time, and without dedicated
> expertise among our core developers, it became increasingly incompatible with
> newer Matplotlib versions. This made it tough to keep up with new features and
> critical bug fixes.
> 
> In this release, we have deprecated these custom backend, and replaced it with
> the new patched version of the `webagg` backend, which is one of the official
> matplotlib backends. This new backend provides a more stable and feature-rich
> experience for rendering matplotlib plots in the browser.
> 
> A huge thank you to [Ian Thomas](https://github.com/ianthomas23), a core
> Matplotlib developer and JupyterLite maintainer, who is now maintaining this new
> backend.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
## A new Matplotlib backend for Pyodide

For years, Pyodide relied on a custom Matplotlib backend (`wasm_backend`) to
render plots directly in your browser. This backend was developed by the creator
of Pyodide, [Michael Droettboom](https://droettboom.com/), who was also a core
developer of Matplotlib.

Another backend, [the `html5_canvas` backend](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/canvas-renderer-matplotlib-in-pyodide/), was developed by Madhur Tandon as a part of a [Google Summer of Code
2019 project](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/archive/2019/projects/4683094261497856).

However, these backends hadn't been maintained for a long time, and without
dedicated expertise among our core developers, they became increasingly incompatible
with newer Matplotlib versions. This made it tough to keep up with new features and
critical bug fixes.

In this release, we have deprecated these custom backends, and replaced them with
the new [patched version](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/pull/29568) of
[the `WebAgg` backend](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/backend_webagg_api.html),
one of the official browser-based Matplotlib backends. This new backend provides
a more stable and feature-rich experience for rendering Matplotlib plots in the browser.

A huge thank you to [Ian Thomas](https://github.com/ianthomas23), a Matplotlib
core developer and JupyterLite maintainer, who is now maintaining this new
backend.

```

Adding attribution to Madhur Tandon's work here, links to the WebAgg backend, plus the work done on it.

directory when opening shared libraries in `somepackage`.

Instead, each dynamic library has its own dependency search path called the
runtime path. This is information included in the dynamic loader section of a
shared library indicating where its dependencies should be located. In this
case, `somebinmod.so` would have an entry saying to look in `somepackage.libs`
for its dependencies.

Previously, WebAssembly shared libraries files did not support runtime paths, so
we had to use a custom patch for the Emscripten dynamic loader to apply the rule
that `somepackage.libs` should be searched when loading libraries from
`somepackage`. This patch exposed us to extra bugs and prevented us from being
able to upstream fixes to the Emscripten dynamic loader. It also forced us to
load dynamic libraries eagerly rather than lazily.

We added runtime path to the WebAssembly specification for the shared library
format, to the llvm WebAssembly object parser and linker, and to the `emcc`
linker. We also updated the dynamic loader to use this information. Finally, we
updated `pyodide-build` to emit the new runtime path data and we removed our

> patch to the dynamic loader.

Author: Does it make sense to leave a mention or footnote about `auditwheel-emscripten` here? I suppose some people could have questions about how we repair our wheels.

Reviewer: I think it's too much detail for a release note.

### Increased Adoption of JavaScript Promise Integration

> JavaScript Promise Integration (JSPI) officially became a Stage 4 finished
> proposal on April 8, 2025, and Chrome 137 (released May 27, 2025) now supports
> JSPI by default, no experimental flag needed.

Author: ```suggestion
JavaScript Promise Integration (JSPI) officially became a Stage 4 finished
proposal on April 8, 2025, and Chrome 137 (released May 27, 2025) now supports
JSPI by default, without any experimental flags.
```

> Pyodide has been a long-time experimenter with JSPI. We turned on several key
> JSPI features by default in Pyodide 0.27.7. This means you can now use
> `asyncio.run()` and `loop.run_until_complete()` in Pyodide to execute Python
> code in the browser to block for asynchronous operations. Previously, this
> capability was gated by the `enableRunUntilComplete` flag in `loadPyodide()`.
> Now, if your browser supports JSPI, these features are enabled automatically.
> See [our blog post about JSPI](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/jspi/) for more
> information.

Author: ```suggestion
Pyodide has been a long-time experimenter with JSPI. We turned on several key
JSPI features by default in Pyodide 0.27.7. This means you can now use
`asyncio.run()` and `loop.run_until_complete()` in Pyodide to execute Python
code in the browser to block for asynchronous operations. Previously, this
capability was gated by the `enableRunUntilComplete` flag in `loadPyodide()`.
Now, if your browser supports JSPI, these features are enabled automatically.
See [our blog post about JSPI in Pyodide](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/jspi/)
for more information.
```

(being more specific)

values round trip: if a JavaScript value is passed to Python and then back to
JavaScript, it should come back `===` to the original value. Previously, both
`null` and `undefined` were converted to `None` and `None` was converted to
`undefined` so `null` would not round trip. This made it impossible to use
JavaScript APIs that treat `null` and `undefined` differently.

Fixing this was more difficult than it would seem. When JavaScript values are
passed into C, we represent them as a WebAssembly `externref`. We want to use a
special value to indicate that an error occured. There is a special WebAssembly
instruction called `ref.is_null` to check whether an `externref` is `null`. All
other `externrefs` were opaque to WebAssembly, and to find out about their
identity we needed to call out to JavaScript. Calling out to JavaScript to test
for an error is slow (we measured a 2-3% performance hit for this) so we used
`null` to signal an error internally.

In order to prevent a `null` that came from the user from being misintepreted as
an error signal, we converted all `null` to `undefined` before passing them into
C. This made supporting `null` in the FFI impossible.

> However, the new WebAssembly Garbage Collection (wasm-gc) feature adds new
> instructions to create and check for special externrefs that are not `null`. We
> switched to using this whenever it is supported. If wasm-gc is not supported, we
> fall back to using a JavaScript function to test for an error and put up with
> the 2-3% performance hit. Since December 2024, all major JavaScript runtimes
> support wasm-gc.

Author: ```suggestion
However, the new WebAssembly Garbage Collection (wasm-gc) feature adds new
instructions to create and check for special externrefs that are not `null`. We
switched to using this whenever it is supported. If wasm-gc is not supported, we
fall back to using a JavaScript function to test for an error and put up with
the 2-3% performance hit. [Since December 2024, all major JavaScript runtimes
support wasm-gc](https://webassembly.org/features/).
```

## Community spotlight: Pyodide in the wild

### SPy: statically typed Python

- New collaborative work on early-stage in-browser statically typed Python for
graphics or computationally heavy use cases:
https://lukasz.langa.pl/f37aa97a-9ea3-4aeb-b6a0-9daeea5a7505/

### Interactive documentation via CZI grant to Scientific Python

> - Wrapping up work on Pyodide interoperability and in-browser documentation for
>   Scientific Python libraries via
>   https://blog.scientific-python.org/scientific-python/2022-czi-grant/

Author: ```suggestion
Work wrapped up on Pyodide interoperability and in-browser interactive documentation
via JupyterLite for Scientific Python libraries via the [2022 grant "Scientific Python Community
& Communications Infrastructure"](https://blog.scientific-python.org/scientific-python/2022-czi-grant/) awarded
by the Chan Zuckerberg Institute to [Scientific Python](https://scientific-python.org/).
```

## Acknowledgements

> 
> We appreciate the continued support the Emscripten team, particularly from Sam
> Clegg. We also appreciate the support from the CPython team, particularly from
> Russell Keith-Magee and Lukasz Langa.
> 
> A special thanks to Ian Thomas for his work on the new Matplotlib backend.
> 

Author: ```suggestion

We appreciate the continued support from the Emscripten team, particularly from
Sam Clegg; from the CPython team, particularly from Russell Keith-Magee and
Łukasz Langa; and from the cibuildwheel team, particularly from Henry Schreiner
and Joe Rickerby.

A special note of thanks to Ian Thomas for his work on the new Matplotlib backend.

```

Python 3.14. We wrote
[PEP 776 – Emscripten Runtime support](https://peps.python.org/pep-0776/)
and
[PEP 783 – Emscripten Packaging](https://peps.python.org/pep-0783/)
in order to standardize the Emscripten target for CPython.

PEP 783 aims to standardize the binary interfaces that Pyodide packages should
follow, helping ensure compatibility with current and future versions of
Pyodide. Our plan is to have one ABI per Python version. This means that
packages built for a particular version of Pyodide will be compatible with all
Pyodide versions that have the same version of Python.

As part of this effort, we defined [the Pyodide ABI](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/abi.html). This should help
people using their own build tooling to ensure that their packages are
compatible with our ABI. Of course, most people will continue to
use `pyodide-build`.

This is a crucial step towards enabling the Pyodide ecosystem to develop with
greater independence from Pyodide runtime releases. If PEP 783 is approved,
we will be allowed to upload wheels with the
`pyodide_${YEAR}_${PATCH}_wasm32` platform tag to PyPI.

> ### Building Binary Packages Compatible with the Pyodide ABI

Author: ```suggestion
### Building binary packages compatible with the Pyodide ABI
```

developer of Matplotlib.

Another backend, [the `html5_canvas` backend](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/canvas-renderer-matplotlib-in-pyodide/), was developed by Madhur Tandon as a part of a [Google Summer of Code
2019 project](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/archive/2019/projects/4683094261497856).

However, these backends hadn't been maintained for a long time, and without
dedicated expertise among our core developers, they became increasingly incompatible
with newer Matplotlib versions. This made it tough to keep up with new features and
critical bug fixes.

In this release, we have deprecated these custom backends, and [replaced them](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/pull/29568) with
a patched version of
[the `WebAgg` backend](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/backend_webagg_api.html),
one of the official browser-based Matplotlib backends. This new backend provides
a more stable and feature-rich experience for rendering Matplotlib plots in the browser.

A huge thank you to [Ian Thomas](https://github.com/ianthomas23), a Matplotlib
core developer and JupyterLite maintainer, who wrote and maintains this new
backend.

## Other improvements

> ### Standardized Package Loading with Runtime Paths

Author: ```suggestion
### Standardized package loading with runtime paths
```

`LD_LIBRARY_PATH`.

Python wheels vendor their shared libraries, so if `somebinmod.so` is contained
in `somepackage` then `somepackage.whl` will include a folder called
`somepackage.libs` with `libsomedep.so` inside. However, `somepackage.libs`
cannot be added to the `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` because we only want to search that
directory when opening shared libraries in `somepackage`.

Instead, each dynamic library has its own dependency search path called the
runtime path. This is information included in the dynamic loader section of a
shared library indicating where its dependencies should be located. In this
case, `somebinmod.so` would have an entry saying to look in `somepackage.libs`
for its dependencies.

Previously, WebAssembly shared libraries files did not support runtime paths, so
we had to use a custom patch for the Emscripten dynamic loader to apply the rule
that `somepackage.libs` should be searched when loading libraries from
`somepackage`. This patch exposed us to extra bugs and prevented us from being
able to upstream fixes to the Emscripten dynamic loader. It also forced us to
load dynamic libraries eagerly rather than lazily.

> We added runtime path to the WebAssembly specification for the shared library

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We added runtime path to the Emscripten specification for the shared library
```

To be precise, I think it is Emscripten not WebAssembly. There is no spec for dynamic loading in WASM spec.

Reviewer: Well it lives here:
https://github.com/WebAssembly/tool-conventions
So I think it's a WebAssembly spec.

format, to the llvm WebAssembly object parser and linker, and to the `emcc`
linker. We also updated the dynamic loader to use this information. Finally, we
updated `pyodide-build` to emit the new runtime path data and we removed our
patch to the dynamic loader.

> ### Increased Adoption of JavaScript Promise Integration

Author: ```suggestion
### Increased adoption of JavaScript Promise Integration (JSPI)
```

These packages will be re-enabled when we can resolve the issues with them. We
welcome contributions from the community to help us with this.

## A new Matplotlib backend for Pyodide

For years, Pyodide relied on a custom Matplotlib backend (`wasm_backend`) to
render plots directly in your browser. This backend was developed by the creator
of Pyodide, [Michael Droettboom](https://droettboom.com/), who was also a core
developer of Matplotlib.

Another backend, [the `html5_canvas` backend](https://blog.pyodide.org/posts/canvas-renderer-matplotlib-in-pyodide/), was developed by Madhur Tandon as a part of a [Google Summer of Code
2019 project](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/archive/2019/projects/4683094261497856).

However, these backends hadn't been maintained for a long time, and without
dedicated expertise among our core developers, they became increasingly incompatible
with newer Matplotlib versions. This made it tough to keep up with new features and
critical bug fixes.

> In this release, we have deprecated these custom backends, and replaced them with
> the new [patched version](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/pull/29568) of
> [the `WebAgg` backend](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/backend_webagg_api.html),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this release, we have deprecated these custom backends, and [replaced them](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/pull/29568) with
a patched version of
[the `WebAgg` backend](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/backend_webagg_api.html),
```

support wasm-gc](https://webassembly.org/features/).

## Community spotlight: Pyodide in the wild

### SPy: statically typed Python

- New collaborative work led to breakthroughs in early-stage in-browser,
statically-typed Python for graphics or computationally heavy use cases, as part
of an [SPy](https://github.com/spylang/spy) demo using Pyodide.

[Read blog post by Łukasz Langa 🔗](https://lukasz.langa.pl/f37aa97a-9ea3-4aeb-b6a0-9daeea5a7505/)

### Interactive documentation via CZI grant to Scientific Python

Work wrapped up on Pyodide interoperability and in-browser interactive documentation
via JupyterLite for Scientific Python libraries via the [2022 grant "Scientific Python Community
& Communications Infrastructure"](https://blog.scientific-python.org/scientific-python/2022-czi-grant/) awarded
by the Chan Zuckerberg Institute to [Scientific Python](https://scientific-python.org/).

## Acknowledgements

We appreciate the continued support from the Emscripten team, particularly from
Sam Clegg; from the CPython team, particularly from Russell Keith-Magee and
Łukasz Langa; and from the cibuildwheel team, particularly from Henry Schreiner
and Joe Rickerby.

> A special note of thanks to Ian Thomas for his work on the new Matplotlib backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Special thanks to Ian Thomas for his work on the new Matplotlib backend.
```
